in the name of Allah most merciful most
compassionate
ald my brothers and sisters the topic
for tonight is interesting and I will
leave some room for questions do you
believe me or have I lost your trust you
believe me I will leave some questions
inshallah so the topic is really about
looking at wealth and materialism from
an Islamic perspective and I would like
to correct some misconceptions about it
so let me begin with a question can a
Muslim be wealthy and
Rich the answer to that brothers and
sisters is an absolutely
yes absolutely
yes in fact being wealthy and
Rich can be a
cause to support the Muslim Community
and the people at large and to serve
your even better and become more
pleasing and beloved to
allaha in fact we're going to go through
the whole content about how being
wealthy and having being
resourceful is an excellent
encouragement in the Quran and
Sunnah I begin with a Hadith from the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
theith is inkari and
Muslim he said
the meaning of the Hadith is as follows
the hand that gives is better than the
hand that begs and receives in other
words Financial Independence is better
than financial dependence
the prop upon Him Goes On by saying and
start with your dependents
first in who you give and spend
on Abu said who are my who are our
financial dependents he said your
wife your children and anyone who is
dependent on you for their livelihood
you start with them first from your
wealth before anyone
else he also said sallallahu alaihi
wasallam the best type of Charity listen
carefully is from what is left over
Beyond one's financial needs meaning
your savings and profit which is the
best
charity after what you spend on
yourself your wife your children your
dependents whatever's left over that you
don't need for your family and your
livelihood your shelter your clothing
your food your security and so on left
over the best charity you can give is
from that why because there's a
priority
dependence take
priority and being obliged to spend on
your dependence is more beloved to Allah
because no one else is going to spend on
him but
you also spending on your
dependence is an obligation which is
also considered a charity in fact it is
the best charity of all charities
what is obliged is the best charity of
all
charity he goes on sallallahu alaihi
wasallam whoever is able to not
need to ask from
others Allah will make him un needy you
stop yourself from asking people for
loans asking people for whether it's
money or anything else don't go into
that habit avoid it as much as you can
Allah says he will make him needy then
he says whoever is
satisfied whoever is satisfied with what
they have Allah will bless their wealth
and their wealth will increase or it
also means whoever relies on their
abilities Allah blessed them with and
seeks financial Independence Allah will
assist him in his seeking and his
efforts so what have we understood from
this a Muslim should be be financially
independent as much as they can if
they're not yet then to seek it and to
work and not sit and wait and use
justifications and excuses that Allah is
going to provide them without
moving and also not to beg and ask and
get out of that
habit and also that your family and
dependence are more worthy come in
priority and it is Haram to neglect them
even in the name of Charity to
others and that the best charity is to
your dependence first and then the next
best charity is what's left over of your
wealth to
others and that obligation towards your
family is a charity you get rewarded
for Abu says to the prophet peace be
upon him who are those you said are the
dependent or messenger of Allah and he
said your
wife so that your wife does not say my
husband you are you have neglected me so
leave me I can't live with you or your
child says oh father you have left me
Barren and vulnerable where do I go
these are the words of the Prophet
sallallahu alaihi
wasallam Allah says in the Quran in
Surah number 4:9 Ina he says
[Music]
and let them fear those
who if they would themselves leave
behind helpless
children they would surely have been
fearful on their account let them then
fear Allah and make the right statement
what does this verse mean Allah is
telling us that there is a legitimate
fear of poverty upon your children and
your family if you were to die and leave
them behind with no financial resources
or wealth that they can look after
themselves when you
die this is a misconception among
Muslims where they say not this there is
a misconception among Muslims where they
say Allah will provide will provide them
it is absolutely true that Allah will
provide them
but Allah also has already provided us
these resources and the ability to work
and he commanded us to do that so
anything which Allah commands us to do
it means we take some of that
responsibility and the responsibility is
to do our part in the end if Allah
provides you from or doesn't that's in
the hands of Allah and everyone's
provision is written but you have to
still work towards it and even your
working towards it is written Allah
facilitates everything fairly and
justly and the meaning of this verse is
that some people when they before they
die they want to donate and give in
charity all their wealth or they start
giving their wealth to certain people
than others or they name it for some of
their children rather than others or
they hide it or whatever it is Allah is
telling them let them fear that they
leave behind an offspring who will be
Barren and vulnerable so fear Allah do
you understand
did not say give your wealth away and
don't worry about your children I will
provide them no no no providing comes in
two ways that Allah provides you without
you asking and he also provides you with
you doing the effort the Hadith Prophet
is very clear says Allah will assist a
person when they do the
effort inheritance therefore is
important and how can you leave behind
wealth for your children and family if
you yourself are not wealthy and knew
yourself have not doesn't seek now we're
not talking about people around the
world who are disadvantaged because of
the the oppression and Corruption of
their governments or because of war or
because of uh circumstances disasters
those people they have to be patient and
Allah will still provide them we're
talking about people whom Allah has
given them security and safety in their
land do have you heard of the companion
named is one of of the elite companions
when I say Elite maybe the wrong word
one of the most important Companions and
the highest of the righteous among the
earliest
Muslims and he was the uncle the
paternal Uncle the maternal Uncle of the
prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam and
he embraced Islam early and he was one
of the 10 mentioned in the in a row
promised
Paradise was among the most affluent and
Wealthy companions among all the
companions his honor and his dignity was
respected and revered and he was a great
help to the Muslim Community with his
wealth and his
resources in the farewell pilgrimage
after the proper peace be upon Him gave
his sermon SAS became ill and he thought
that he was going to die the Hadith is
in bukari and Muslim so he said to the
prophet peace be upon him when he went
to visit him Allah I feel that I'm going
to
die and I have all this wealth I am very
comfortable with wealth
all I have is one
daughter can I give 23ds of my wealth in
charity to someone else and just leave a
third for my daughter since I only have
a daughter and a
wife the prophet sallallahu alaihi
wasallam said no no don't do that he
said how about a half half of all my
wealth I'll leave the rest for my
daughter and my wife he said no not
allow owed to do that he said how about
a third andam said if you want you can
donate a third but even that is too much
in other words he discouraged
him one daughter one wife
now who did live live on after that and
he had many children after his daughter
and Subhan Allah his wealth benefited
the Muslims benefited him benefited his
family and the prophet Sall alaihi
wasallam he replied to
saying for you to leave your family and
children
wealthy independent financially from
needing other
people is much better to Allah and more
beloved than to allow them to go and beg
people and rely on the community to help
them do you understand my brothers and
sisters now here is another
thing wasallam the prophet peace be upon
Him used to seek
Refuge from
poverty another
misconception is people think that the
prophet Sall alaihi wasallam liked to be
poor or that or that he was poor this is
wrong neither liked poverty nor was he
poor butam
chose to have only the minimum finances
for himself and his family and he always
gave it away he chose to be an aesthetic
Z why because he's the role
model and he's the messenger of
Allah he used to say Sall alai wasallam
the Hadith is
in the companion's name is muslam I abak
he said my father I found my father his
father is a companion of the Prophet
peace be upon him this was after the
death of prophet wasam he said I used to
see my father making the following Dua
after every Salah five times a day he
used to say
oh Allah I seek Refuge with you from
disbelief kufur and
poverty and the punishment of the
Grave so I used to say them after my
father then my father said to me my son
where did you learn this Dua from and my
and he said I lent it off you oh Father
and and then his father said the
messenger of s used to say the same Dua
after every
Salah thei is authenticated
by so what is the combination between
kufur and poverty he said oh Allah I
seek refuge in you from disbelief and
poverty why did the prophet put these
two together I'm here to educate you
brother and sisters I'm not here to
motivate you for nothing we want to
learn on a deeper
level why is poverty and kufur put
together and what type of kufur
disbelief is the prophet talking about
here's the answer brother and sisters
from the
scholars poverty they said leads to
desperation and Desperation leads to
selling your dignity and honor and it
leads you to dealing with Haram to
survive and may lead to disbelief or
doing acts of disbelief in order to
survive andam called it kufur and kufur
has to meanings it means real disbelief
from the heart and kufur also means
kufur of action which doesn't make you a
real disbeliever and kufur also means a
third meaning and that is to be
ungrateful and to deny the blessings you
have so to say words that are ungrateful
and poverty can do that to people soam
sought Refuge now if somebody's in need
and is struggling and the only means of
survival is going through Haram then
they are exempt and there's no sin upon
them but some people poverty does lead
them to even leave
Islam another meaning is
that is oh Allah do not make me
incapacitated so that you are unable to
so that I am not able to give and help
others making a person dependent on
those above them and have no option but
to but to certain things that may
compromise their religion and Faith oh
Allah do not make me among those
now here is uh another Hadith beautiful
Dua that you can
say oh Allah I se refuge in you from
worries and
sadness and I seek refuge in you from
being
incapacitated and from
laziness Allah saage in you from being
cowardice a coward and from stinginess
and I seek refuge in you Allah from the
debts overcoming me and from the power
and authority of men don't make me below
them so that I have to beg and cover and
do whatever they tell me and lose my
dignity listen to this amazing Dua of a
great companion
named is also a promised paradise and he
was one of the ANS among the early
Muslims and he was a leader and a chief
of one of the tribes of
Medina I I haven't heard this do from
any other narrated from any other
companion listen to it he
said he says oh Allah Grant me honor and
value grant me honor and
value and I cannot have honor and value
without action and
giving and there cannot be any action
and giving without Financial
Resources oh
Allah limited Financial Resources do not
make me adequately functionable they
don't suit me and I cannot adequately
function without having abundance in
wealth
it's very clear Allah I want honor and
value I cannot have it without action
and giving and I cannot act and give
without you making me wealthy and Rich
and not being rich doesn't suit me I
can't function like that and if I am
poor it incapacitates me I can't live
like
that the Hadith is in
Alim narrat
ab and and is authentic and very well
known and you know what as a result of
that
Dua listen
carefully muham wasallam he migrated
from Makkah to where to Medina how long
did he spend in
Medina 10
years so each year is 300 let's say 365
days how many days would 10 years be 365
times 10 years don't worry I've already
done the calculation 30
3,650 days
approximately do you know what did as a
result of Allah granting him that wealth
and that Dua he used to gift the prophet
peace be upon him a gift every day
sometimes a shoulder of a lamb sometimes
a a goat sometimes something else every
single day for 10 years he gifted him
3,650 gifts how because he was able
financially now if that's what he did
for the prophet Sall Ali wasallam
imagine what he did for his people for
his family for the Muslims for the
community and
abroad adding to that you know the 10
promised Paradise among the companions
there are more promis but in that Hadith
there are 10 did you know that seven out
of those 10 were extremely
wealthy among them
wasd we all have heard about abdan how
wealthy and Powerful he was did you know
that
Scholars have estimated in today's US
currency of how much approximately abdb
had in Dinars compared to today's modern
world they estimated his wealth to be at
least $800
million that was his entire life uh and
wealth he was worth $800 million Us in
modern
world so was
all of them started off poor he started
off poor and he
married the daughter of the Prophet Sall
wasallam and they were extremely poor he
was very hard for them he was quite
young and one day he said to the prophet
I'm suffering from poverty he waited and
the man came in and gave some donations
of a few Dinars or Dirham sorry Dirham
is less than a
dinar Dirham is what I don't know maybe
about $7 Australian
received this and what did he give Al he
gave him one
one and he said go to the market and buy
yourself such and such dates or whatever
and then go and sell them for a profit
of such and such then take that profet
and bring it back to me he went and did
exactly as the prophet wasallam said he
came back with some Prophet said now
take it again and buy this or that and
sell it again and make some profit and
again and again until he had enough for
his family to last him for a little
while and so began a business of prophet
so a Muslim invests a Muslim profits a
Muslim gets into trade and business if
they can a Muslim educates themselves a
Muslim reads books about how to invest
in business a Muslim reads about the
boundaries that Islam has placed in how
to invest in a Halal way and what is
Haram in how to earn your wealth in
halal and what is Haram in how to spend
it in halal and how to spend it in har a
Muslim reads before they even earn money
what does this you have to study it is a
an obligation anything you're about to
do in life it is an obligation to study
that area of your Dean seek advice from
Scholars or read a book about of on
Islam from Islam about that topic so
let's say Finance what is halal Finance
what is Haram how do you spend it what
are your
obligations who has to receive from your
wealth what is z what is how much do you
have to give and so on then be wealthy
as wealthy as you like
but don't forget Allah's
right Islam does not base your value on
whether a person is Rich or poor Islam
looks at your obedience to Allah your
worship your
conduct and whether that wealth enters
your heart and changes you becoming
stingy miserly full of arrogance and
pride or whether poverty makes you a
person who leaves the dean and blames
Allah and so on and so forth it's all a
test wealth is a test poverty is a test
everything in our life is a
test my brothers and
sisters some people say well what about
the verses in the
Quran
abundance has made you
heedless you might say huh there you go
the verse of the Quran is is warning us
not to have abundance of wealth because
it makes us heedless no no no read it
again Allah is not saying abundance
makes you heedless he's saying your
accumulation of your abundance has
changed you so that you became heedless
because of it so therefore it's not the
wealth it's how you looked at wealth how
you approached wealth not that wealth
makes you
heedless wealth makes you more powerful
you have a more say in government
politics in the economy of a country in
your say in your influence on powerful
people yes that is true and that is why
I always encourage the Muslim
communities that we need to always work
together to find ways of employing one
another making resources available for
each other to help each other grow train
each other assist one another so our
community can grow and be strong
powerful ful independent financially and
not need
anybody another thing that Islam looks
at is
this don't be a person who takes out
loans all the time unless it's necessary
Islam discourages even looks frowns upon
it deeply if a Muslim is used to always
asking people and getting a loan for no
NE no
necessity asking for a
loan is dangerous because you may not be
able to pay it
off asking for a loan when you don't
need it is even
worse because you will be denying Other
M Muslims who have that wealth to invest
and grow for example if I come up to you
and I have alhamdulillah enough wealth
but I see a business opportunity I want
to borrow that money off you so that I
can invest it and make profit and then I
give you back just that money as it was
after a year then I have harmed you you
could have invested and grown your
wealth and helped your family but
instead I took it an invested it's not
Haram it's
okay but it's frowned upon in Islam
because the wealth of the Muslims are
meant to circulate and help each other
and assist one another to become
stronger the there is a Hadith which
makes me really think in the Hadith is
authentic that the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam came to pray a janaza on
a man for for man sorry the word is not
on for a man Jan Sal he had died one of
the Companions and it was the habit of
the Prophet Ali wasallam to always ask
does your brother your companion or your
sister have a debt still
owing and this man had a debt still
owing I think it was about 70
din something like $7,000
Australian they said he still owes a
debt he hasn't paid it off and he was
able
said you go and pray and he refused to
pray not because he doesn't deserve it
but's Dua want he wants it to be
accepted and because of that he doesn't
want his Dua to be refused because of
that again he's discouraging the
companions from getting used to asking
people and going to debt unnecessarily
one companion put his hand up and said
Yol Allah I will settle his debt so long
as you pray for him he said if is that
an agreement in contract he said yes he
witnessed the companions as a witness
and said very well so if you have
somebody that's why people should make a
will if you owe debts make sure you have
someone else who will carry out to pay
off that debt for
you after a few days he saw the
companion he said to him did you pay the
debt off your brother he said I was busy
then after another few days he said now
I paid it Allah now this part of the
Hadith I'm not sure of its auth
authenticity but it is still scary it
says now his skin has cool
down only Allah knows best I'm not I
can't guarantee this part of the Hadith
to be authentic
but there is a frowning upon people who
seek loans
unnecessarily brothers and
sisters finally we find that wealth
can get to our hearts and minds and
destroy our relationships and destroy
our obligations and make even blood
relatives become
enemies I've seen it in business
dealings in business
Partnerships in inheritance a father
dies a mother dies the children start to
divide and fight over the
inheritance when Allah subhah wa ta'ala
has clearly stipulated exactly who write
is what and we heard about those two men
who entered upon the prophet D David D
one of the greatest
judges and now were in fact angels in
the form of humans to test D to teach
him a lesson Allah want to teach him
something they acted like there were two
partners in a business and one of them
said my brother here my partner did this
and that to me and he took my wealth and
didn't repay me such and such D was
still asleep and he had woken up and he
was a bit distorted and he said to them
immediately without hearing the other
side of the story your partner has
oppressed you he owes you this and he
has you that now go and they left and
Allah sent to him jel to tell him you
have dealt with them unjustly you did
not hear the other side of the story and
you gave judgment
so the Quran says that went down in
prostration to the ground and he came
close to Allah and asked him for his
forgiveness Allah tested him what did he
tested with a judge cannot judge when
they are not fully aware so he just woke
up number two when they're distraught
number three without hearing both sides
of the story and number four if there is
conflict of
interest but what said here that I want
to highlight he said to
them many partners in dealings and
business
majority of them they transgress each
other and do wrong by each other except
very few whom Allah has given
mercy so fear Allah in your partnership
dealings and your
transactions and fear
Allah there is a
whole Ayah you know what an aah is
what's an Ayah in the Quran a verse for
example
that's an a sometimes the a is a bit
longer that's longer sometimes it's a
few lines sometimes it's half a page and
sometimes
it's only one time in the entire Quran
there is one Ayah that appears the
entire
page why is this aah so long and why do
we have to finish it ah who knows what
it's
about brother said it's about
R huh
debts D it is called the a of of D of
debts and you said someone else
said okay inheritance Ty no it's not
about inheritance it is called the Ayah
of debts in fact it doesn't just talk
about debts it talks about contracts
debts how to witness debts and how to
write it talks about
transactions let's see I'm not going to
recite the whole verse I'm just going to
give you the summary the points the
important points it it discusses number
one it says and these are my words of
course I'm just summarizing the words of
Allah subhana wa taala beware leaving
behind
financially oh sorry I I EXC it says
number one right so it's verse uh it's
chapter number two verse
282 verse 2
82 it
says if you enter into a loan agreement
then you must write it down that's the
first thing it
says You must what you must write it
down some people because they're their
friend or their relative or their father
or mother or their brother or their
sister they think that if they write it
down they take it as if it's a distrust
wrong we have to stop this trend and
this
misconception it is an obligation to
write it down number two or get an
independent person to write it and he
shouldn't refuse get someone else to
write it if you like the point it has to
be written number three the data
dictates to the
writer what to
write this the next Point fear
Allah and detail every term clearly you
have to be very detailed and
clear the next point if the deta
is not fit enough maybe they're not very
mature enough let their Guardian write
it on his or her behalf do you see how
much writing is so
emphasized and Allah then says two
trustworthy men have to witness to the
agreement and if you cannot find two
trustworthy men Allah says then one
trustworthy man and two trustworthy
women why because Allah says if one
woman woman forgets the other one
reminds her but then you might say what
in this day and age women work with the
answer to that brothers and sisters is
not that women are
less uh knowledgeable or less logical or
less rational or less in their brain or
their mind no this is a
misunderstanding it is because the
nature of majority of women number one
it's not an obligation for women to
financially be responsible for families
which then causes that necessitates that
many women throughout time and even in
the world today will not be dealing much
with finances unless she wants to number
three Allah is telling us that since the
obligation of Finance is not on women
therefore a woman May because she's not
involved in it all the time she may
forget she may be pregnant she may be
going through uh child rearing and so on
and so forth where she has she has more
likeliness to forget what it was so
write it down anyway Allah then says the
witnesses must not refuse if to give
evidence later the next one no slackness
or negligence in dealing in detailing
the transactions and the terms then
Allah says must clearly write the terms
due date then he says the fair this is
fairest and more just so that there are
no ambiguities doubts or accusations
later on then Allah says but immediate
transactions like a sale or a purchase
that is on the spot you are not obliged
to write it but it is preferable to
write it I.E invoices and
receipts and lastly the Scribe the
person who wrote it must never be
threatened or caused any
harm so brothers and sisters this whole
Ayah is talking so much about the rights
of people's finances and debts that it
must be in this
manner do you see how important it is
brother and
sisters one brother asked me on a side
note do I have to tell my wife wife if
somebody has borrowed some money from
me what do you think brother and sisters
should he tell his
wife
huh what if he's hiding money doesn't
want his wife to know in case they leave
each other and then she goes after it
some men do that don't they should he
hide it from his wife what do you think
I advis hims the family huh if it
affects the family if it affects the
family should hide it
yeah I his wife is still with them and
they're living normal like husband and
wife there's none of that threat or
anything on either side normal you have
your ups and
downs okay alhamdulillah people on the
camera looking at me don't see you
because some of you are shaking some of
you are
nodding uh the answer I gave to this
brother is he should tell his wife who
knows why but why do you think I said
that
huh if he dies if he dies what yes what
what's the consequence if he dies why
would I tell him tell your
wife okay she had okay you're on the
right she says that's like her money not
all of it is her money don't put us into
a big problem
now oh it matter cuz time time can I can
I answer it in show cuz time is running
out forgive me brother and sister I know
that you know the answer
masallah aren't there rights in in
wealth to other people does the wife
inherit anything do the children inherit
anything part of that wealth she has a
right to
it and if she doesn't know that someone
is owing them how does she go after her
rights you might say I'll let his
brother or let his father or
let yes you can do that but eventually
she must know and it is better to let
your wife know and your husband know
even your children to
know because a person has the right
we'll go after that right as
well don't hide these
things so my brothers and sisters as you
can see therefore wealth in Islam is
encouraged on one condition that you
give your
zaka you give
Sak it doesn't change your heart to
neglect your duties to Allah or the
community and the Muslims that you use
your wealth in the right way not in the
Haram way that you prioritize those who
have a right to it first yourself your
wife your children and then others that
you earn it in halal and you spend it in
Hal and there's nothing wrong with
driving a nice car wearing nice clothes
a man came I'll end it with this a man
came said
allaham he said whoever wears a a
garment to show off with will be given a
garment of the fire on a day of judgment
one man said I like to wear nice
shoes he said that's
different Allah is beautiful and he
loves to see
beauty right he said I am talking about
the person who is arrogant ungrateful to
Allah considers himself independent of
God's provision when you ask them they
say it's me and only me and denies
Allah's favors and denies other people
that right and sees himself Superior to
others because of the Garment he or she
is wearing same with the car same with
your hat same with your glasses same
with whatever you wear a Muslim humbles
thems in
another he
said Allah loves to see the effect of
His blessings on his slave so when he
gives you he loves to see its effect but
the believer thanks Allah for it and
it's and doesn't connect his heart to it
I say my final statement there are
people who are
financially
independent but the finances control
them and there are those who are
independent of financial
dependence I repeat there are those who
are in financially independent but
they're dependent on their money and
there are others who
are financially who are in dependent of
their financial
dependence money is secondary to them
they always have the abundance mentality
if it goes they don't lose hope they
always say alhamdulillah it will happen
again and my risk is with Allah if they
donate they don't say oh my God I'm
going to starve they say Allah will
provide me and the wealth becomes a
means not an ends so that you don't
compete to it you don't disunite because
of it you don't make it your everything
in your life and make it the most
beloved thing to you and put your duties
and your Obedience of Allah and the
rights and your uh moral values behind
the money as if the money becomes your
God does everybody understand the
lecture that we gave today I hope so y
uh I told you I'll give you time for
your questions but is a time
for forgive me those who had questions I
couldn't answer